And the whole craft of travel writing is really almost an exclusive club these days, isn't it?
I mean, you're in the tradition of Graham Greene and .
It's a very British tradition, it seems.
I don't think you have it in the States to quite the same degree.
And I guess my mentors back in England were people like Fairstark, Patrick Lee Firma, maybe not very well known here.
My contemporaries, though, like Jonathan Rabin, who's moved to Seattle, and Porto, who's, you know, North Atlantic, as it were, and Bruce Chatwin, that was all kind of, you know, these are a bit more familiar, I guess.
But, yes, it's a very old craft.
It goes back to, I guess, one of the reasons is, although I'm only guessing, is that, you know, the British Empire invited people, as it were, to
travel with some sort of security and certainly great superiority complex all the way around the world in a way that no other empire quite did.
And people got used to thinking of the world as their sort of hunting ground, travel writers as well as merchants.
But I think that we have to really distinguish, and this is my job as the critic as well, is to really, I mean the writing is beautiful by the way.
You really do
transport the reader.
And in this age of multimedia attractions with television sets and all these other things, what is the challenge to a travel writer?
What is incumbent upon you to give to the person who picks up the book that the person will get from you and from no other?
It is significant selling.
There are no photographs to it.
We'll talk about that in some ways as well.
I think, you know, what travel writers used to give traditionally, I mean, say, in the last century, was, I mean, travel writers of the more sort of adventurous kind, like myself, was to come back with knowledge that was sort of empirical usefulness to whatever society had sent them.
You know, they'd come back with actual new things, geographical novelty, and it made a lot of those descriptions in that time very sort of exact and almost scientific.
that's all gone of course the travel writer now knows he's been preceded by sociologists and anthropologists and probably art historians and heaven knows what so I think we have automatically become a little different I know that I have and I feel that what I have to give is more the kind of insights that people would get if they were traveling in the way that I'm traveling in other ways
In other words, building up a picture of a region or a civilization or a city piecemeal, really, just as we really experience it.
In other words, by chance encounters, by a little bit of historical knowledge, by sudden interest in landscape or piece of architecture, by everything from the dog that's peeing on the corner of the street to the interesting, maybe highly educated person you meet who tells you about the society.
to the, probably, maybe the victim who suffered in it.
It, in other words, builds up a picture like a mosaic, really, so that your leader, by the end of the book, you hope is given your experience without it having to be tied up in a journalistic way or in an academic way, saying, this is what I know about this country, here it is, it is like this or it is like that.
I don't think on the whole, you know, countries are like that.
And it's maybe truer and, you know, one has the fortune really in an entire book to be able to build up the complexities and the self-contradictions and the thing that one person feels and another suffers and another thinks, you know, in that sort of almost random ways it is.
And of course, in travel writing, you yourself are part of your own landscape, so you're not
playing God so much.
You do bring your baggage to the project, aren't you?
Yes, of course you do.
And I suppose whereas an academic has to say, you know, from my studies, what I know is this, this, and this, and ordering the thing, you're saying, well, here I am traveling in this landscape.
I had altitude sickness today, or I had a stomach cramp, or what it seemed to me was this.
But you're not playing God in the way that you would if you were quite abstracted from your own drama.
Yes.
It is an interesting, it is a curiosity, isn't it?
I mean, there are certainly not as many travel writers today as there were back in the 30s or the 40s, but on the other hand, I don't have to think that this is really, you know, a choice virgin preserve almost, isn't it?
Because it really has been off limits for the larger part of the century entirely almost.
This is almost a unique sort of
opportunity really since 1990 when these countries became independent.
The old Soviet rules by which you had to be in your hotel and you knew exactly where you were every night and where you'd gone and sometimes you were followed.
That's all gone.
Those rules have gone and these independent countries haven't produced regulations of their end to take their place.
So if I was discovered in some out of the way part where I would normally have not been allowed to be, they didn't know what to do with me really.
So for the first time really in any of our lifetimes, I think, you can travel virtually where you like in Central Asia if you want.
Beyond that, as you point out very early on in the book, the Soviet government, and I think the metaphor you used, had attempted to annotate their histories.
Even had you been allowed this limited access, there still would have been this anxiety, fear, out of the part of the people there to really...
give you of themselves.
I mean, you really wouldn't have been able to get the stories.
Absolutely.
They would have never thought of disburdening them that way.
They wouldn't have asked you into their homes, and they would have felt wary of talking to you altogether.
So that was a huge benefit.
I guess it amazes me
You say also that this region is larger geographically than Western Europe.
Is that fascinating?
Yes, it's larger than India.
It's huge.
It's larger than India.
It's enormous Kazakhstan alone.
It's a million square miles.
It's colossal.
So, again, tell me, you had also on the author's note, you point out you've been to China, you've traveled to there, you've done Russia.
This was the missing link, apparently, or the puzzle, the piece of puzzle.
Yeah, this sort of shadow land in the middle.
Is this something you had always wanted to do, or is it opportunity?
I mean, is this a target of opportunities?
No, I'd always wanted to do it.
It was just lucky for me that it became so much more open at the time that I came to it.
Now, I wanted to do it originally when I was traveling in the early 80s in the last years of Brezhnev in the western part of Russia.
but you couldn't take a car in then, and your tour was terribly sharply defined.
You know, you were allowed to go just to Thamakambekhah and Tashkets, so I could remember almost nothing else.
And I didn't want that, so I thought, well, I have to leave it.
Do you have a sense of story now you say 6,000 miles?
I mean, you're a pro and you've done a lot of writing, but nevertheless, there must be a feeling of anxiety at the spec.
Will I have a story here?
At what point did the story begin to shape itself for you?
Address yourself specifically to this.
Yes, there's always an anxiety.
And there always has been my books.
And with this one too, you know, I arrived in Ashford, the capital of Turkmenistan, which is a sort of non-city.
It's a kind of nuclear landscape.
It's a lunar landscape in which the Russians built this city quite artificially.
It's very young, the capital of Turkmenistan, a desert land really, and a hundred years ago they had no cities, no towns even.
And so the Russians built this, really, it was literally a military station, but it sort of communist, it looks like a sort of communist blueprint with the typical Marxist things, there's a Lenin square, an ex-Lenin square, and an ex-Marx Avenue, and an ex, well, still a working ballet theater, and so on.
I just got this thing that I'm never going to touch this country.
Here I'm just being served up a Soviet model.
What I want to do is meet the native people and find something real and distinctive here.
And that's happened to me with every one of my books.
I arrive in panic the first two or three days.
I'm not going to make any contact.
The key always seems to just be able to talk to one or two natural people and get a proper insightful conversation, even if it's very brief.
And then I suddenly feel, yes, these people are going to talk to me and it's all right.
That happens to me every time.
And then I begin to feel that I'm going to... I don't worry about the story exactly too much.
I know where I'm going to travel usually.
I leave it flexible, but I know roughly...
the sort of graph that I get to travel about.
It really was scripted in advance, then?
Yes, pretty well.
No, and what it was, because I didn't know what I was going to come upon on the way, and of course if people offer something, or say, why don't you go here, or I've got, my father lives up here, come here, then you take advantage of it.
But in general, I know, you know, like, start in one area and move to another.
Kind of like a jazz piece, I mean, you certainly allow yourself improvisation.
Exactly, yeah.
That's exactly it.
But the fear is less that the story won't develop, because I know I'm going to be traveling on a certain route, it's that it's not going to yield anything up, that I'm not going to feel I've really touched on the sort of reality of people's lives.
That's what, you know, I know, I've studied the history a certain amount, of course, and politics as much as I wanted.
So that was there.
What you fear is that you're just going to remain an outsider always.
It's a sort of paranoia, almost, in the first few days, that you're going to be excluded.
Obviously, human nature is human nature.
There must be a one hand, having done how many travel books now?
Six, yeah.
So there must be a six.
There must be certain similarities on the one hand, but there always must be these exciting discoveries.
I mean, you don't become jaded from having done somebody in the... No.
That's a question, I guess.
No, I haven't yet.
I become jaded towards the end of a long journey.
Then I begin to feel tired, and I feel all sort of sensitivities are blunted.
so that when you start being fascinated by everything, everything seems new and you're full of energy and, you know, pouring down notes, for instance, in the evenings and so on, because everything is so exciting and different.
After a few months, of course, you got used to it all, and it takes something more and more odd or extreme or different to give you that adrenaline again.
Then I think I have a sort of instinct as to when it's time to get home.
You do.
You know when you have a story.
It's like even in a very contracted way, I know here when I have my lead, and I'm always looking for my kicker.
It's a little different than that because of course it's a very extended, but it's more knowing that you've sort of made the touch, you've got through and you've touched people.
and that they're going to talk to you.
And then you can almost let it go.
It goes on being in anxiety with each new situation that you're not going to find anybody who will respond to you.
What most of all would you want to find?
I mean, this is, of course, this is a legendary place, certainly rich in history and through the centuries on the one hand, but I mean, the Silk Road and all this fascinating place.
What did you want?
I knew I'd find the interesting places, because there they were on the map, and I knew I could get to them.
There were one or two more distant ones that I'd only vaguely read about, even in the counts of travelers before the First World War, because there was such a very short time in which this area was accessible, basically between about 1870 and 1910, probably.
It was possible to go there, and quite a lot of travelers, European travelers, and one very good American traveler went there and recounted what they saw.
But before then, it was an uncle Schuller, Eugene Schuller, a lovely book, and much the most detailed and the most sort of reliable and interesting.
He traveled eight months to this area, and he was the best, really.
But before then, people were murdered if they came into this area.
You're lucky to get out with your life.
And after then was the chaos of the First World War and then Bolshevism, which excluded travelers virtually.
So there was just this very short period.
And reading some of these books, fragments of knowledge of places that were there then came up.
But I couldn't be sure that they were still there necessarily.
So, you know, but mainly my concern was with people's identity, with who these people thought they were now, where they thought they were going, where they took their sense of being from.
You certainly don't find a sense of xenophobia there, do you?
No, considering everything, you know, no, considering it's been such an enclosed and cut off part of the world in many ways.
really very little, more sense of curiosity, particularly if you're a Westerner.
Tell me, is this by policy?
I mean, do you shoot photographs while you run these things?
No.
It's partly been necessity, but mainly sort of, with me, a kind of psychological thing.
I quite like not having a camera.
So you don't carry it usually?
No.
You usually be the poorest with a camera.
If you're found with a camera.
I carry cameras on my assignments and I look at it as a professional thing.
I sort of, could I tend to try to be a bit inconspicuous if I can, usually in these even ex-communist countries.
but they usually took me for being a estonian or something you know initially at least yes i think so um but the estonians are rather gaunt like me and speak bad russian so they tend to think i was a bolt or something um but camera tends to sort of slightly highlight the fact that you're separate and watching and different and i was trying to sort of douse that down but the other thing is you know when the police do discover you and
surf through your baggage and stuff.
They find a camera and they don't like it.
All my film in the first trip I did in the Soviet Union was exposed by the KGB and developed very badly and was unusable.
But more important, I think, publishers, I don't know how American publishers are with this, but my British publishers, and I agree with this, tend to feel that what you're doing in these books is trying to let people see through your eyes.
This is a quote I'm looking for.
It might be...
that you're basically painting the picture for them.
And so they're looking, as it were, through your lens.
Whereas a camera, a film, you're giving them back their eyes in a way.
They are seeing what they would if they were standing where the camera lens had been, as it were.
Whereas you're trying to transform the picture.
I mean, everybody sees the same thing differently.
And I would want them, or I suppose they
throws there is inviting people to see through my sort of aesthetic sensibility or historical sense or whatever it may be it's my journey that they're seeing and I suppose you were asking about the differences that say television is from a book and a book is very much asking you to travel with somebody else and the television's not, it's restoring and I think the fact that you are not taking photographs personally it's very important that when you sit, when you
writing this, that what you remember, I mean, your
are far more important.
I mean, that's the stuff that you're going to retain, too, isn't it?
The impressions and the feelings and the visual things.
That's what's going to be translated into that.
Exactly, which is tremendously personal, of course, and everybody's going to have a different love.
Which makes it such a charming, almost dated genre.
A throwback.
I don't want to say dated writing, but this is what they did.
And it's so wonderful to have
people going with yeah in a way you know i feel that travel writing will sort of survive because i mean not only are places changing all the time but the sort of sensibilities and the priorities of every generation of travel writers is changing too i mean people of my generation write with quite different priorities than people of 30 years ago i think you know we tend to be a little more concerned with with ordinary life and um
and less with the sort of grandeur of art and history in a way.
I think if that book had been written by somebody 40 years ago, it's very likely that would be rather more, in England, I mean, rather more sort of history and maybe even philosophy or a little in it or something.
So I reckon even if you don't explore something new geographically, there's usually something to be explored in the way societies have changed.
And I think this brings us quite nicely to the importance of barriers
I mean, a book such as this has to have a story.
I mean, it's not just Colin going off to the heart of Asia and talking about the buildings and the people and the landscape.
There has to be a story here.
And talk a little bit about that.
All right, you're on.
Go ahead.
Yes, probably.
What was the question?
Well, the formulation of the story of the narrative for you.
I suppose... Did you have a sense of this before you were going?
Did it evolve during the... It evolved, really.
I suppose what you realize is that the feeling of unity has to come from yourself, because what you're doing, really, is experiencing a series of fragments.
You know, you're meeting one person this moment, you're looking out at some scenery the next moment, you're trying to get a bus the next moment, you're having a passage of history the next moment, and then you're meeting somebody else.
And all the time, in a way, it's like a chain with a whole lot of different links in it, which build up eventually to a picture.
But I suppose the coordinating link between the chain is only yourself.
You're the one that's doing the journey.
You're the one on which all these events or insights or lack of them are being threaded.
And so it's what happens in you, I suppose, that is, in a way, quite subtly, you hope, the narrative.
In this case, for instance, I've nearly always found in the book that some question comes up, some central idea or question, which gives the coordination to the whole journey.
In the book on China, it was...
but preoccupation with the cruelty that they had dealt one another in the Cultural Revolution, an unease, really.
It sounds very racist, but about the sort of national psyche, the particular kind of cruelty that they visited on one another.
But in this case, quite predictably, it became a matter of the identity.
I was sort of hunting for their identity, really, and it was the development of that theme, I suppose, and my...
only half ability to find it, or to give it to me, that became the real narrative theme.
And how long were you, how long did the trip change?
Very short, it was about, it was less than five months.
Really?
And I think it's significant also that you're a novelist.
So there is this, I mean, there is this sense of, to go back to story and to narrative skills, we are
writing a book that is an art of structure.
It's something I almost sort of take for granted.
I'm not thinking about it really, but I know that when I'm writing it that I'm conscious that it must have a shape.
And the only shape it can really have is that thread of slowly realizing things in the case of this book, slowly having miniature discoveries and revelations, starting out really with a blank, not knowing
in a way how these people thought about themselves or what their future was or how five independent nations would be getting their sense of community of who they were and it's that I suppose bit by bit which is in this case the discovery that this sense of self for these peoples is very thin by our standards you know it's not the Soviet cloak's gone Islam's thinner than one expected the sense of nation is not really there
a sense of sort of clan and extended family.
But I felt all the time in a way that I was looking for something which was more due to my un-ease than to theirs.
They went missing, which they never had.
But me, with a automatic sense of Englishness, I suppose, as you with American-ness would sort of assume that people received their identity from nationhood.
But it wasn't so here.
And I suppose the journey always was, I mean, a rather muted one was this sort of discovery.
or attempt to discover.
When you think, when you recall the trip, the journey, what visual images flashed?
I mean, what do you conjure up?
What do you remember?
Oh, certain very potent things, I suppose.
Mostly people that one met.
I always remember that collective farm director near the Aral Sea sitting under a naked light bulb in a mudvick hut.
the director of a collective farm while all around him the land was so salinated that there was nothing he could do about it and his fight was failing seemed to sort of symbolize the hopelessness of the whole Soviet system in artificially trying to change almost the ecology of the country to suit mega economics knit in with the Soviet Union and that other people I suppose I think of the
the extraordinary Russian woman who I knew in Bukhara, the old Russian lady who had fought in the Second World War, covered in her war medals, still talking about Stalin with reference, but whose husband and whose father had both been killed by Stalin, and yet she still felt she owed an allegiance to the old Soviet Union and despised what was happening now.
That tells you Reims about this sort of mentality.
of these people, or the little old man who I met sitting out in Merv, a tiny little man whose leg had been, who was crippled, his spine had been severed, and who was just carving little medallions for pilgrims who came, and talking still, you would have thought if there was any man, he was sort of guardian of a religious shrine really,
there was anybody who would be looking to Islamic fundamentalism.
It would be this kind of person, completely traditional, looking after a religious shrine.
But the first person said to me, you know, that's all right for those people down there, but we make our own Islam here.
We're Turkic, we're different.
A lot of people like that.
And of course, that man, Oman, who drove me, the Uzbek, for many, many weeks.
I remember him very strongly,
He was a lesson, really, in how not to take people at their certest value.
Underneath this, ma'am, there's a whole complex layer of experience.
And one found that again and again with people that, you know, what you take for granted.
And because our lives are fairly, we were lucky, you don't assume there are great tragedies in the back of most of them.
But with these people, you began to assume that they had tragedies in their lives.
A couple of brief questions.
Have you always had this sense of wanderlust?
What makes a travel writer?
I mean, do you love to—and you do these things by yourself, right?
I mean, you don't take family with you or anything like that.
No, no.
Poor things.
No, I never would.
I've occasionally travelled with girlfriends, but that's just for fun, you know.
When actually writing a book and being serious, it's a bit too tough to take anybody with you, really.
You wouldn't want to impose that on them.
Also, you tend, if you're going with one other person of your own culture, you sort of are going in a bubble of Englishness, in my case, and you're sort of comforting one another and looking out from your bubble, saying, isn't that funny or isn't that humorous or isn't that peculiar?
But if you're alone, you're the peculiar one and you have to get down and understand them and, you know...
make a sort of imaginative leap i've always loved traveling i suppose the root of it is always curiosity you know it's got sheer inquisitiveness about the world and a rather um hyperactive romantic imagination i think which you know is looking for something stranger more beautiful more extraordinary over the horizon i mean that's not so naive to think you're going to quite get it but then when you're there you of course get fascinated by the reality of it
So you don't carry a camera.
You also, I gather, don't carry a tape recorder.
All the conversations are probably reconstructed later that night or whatever it is there.
Yes, I have occasionally taken a tape recorder, but often I feel rather mean sort of putting it on without people knowing.
If they do know you're taping them, of course, they behave in different ways.
They become more theatrical or more defensive or something.
So the conversations are basically reconstructed.
See, they're too artificial.
if you put a tape recorder on with their knowledge, and it seems not a nasty to have one without their knowledge.
So the conversations are reconstructed.
But usually I find that the essential things are the ones that sort of obsessed me.
I think I've remembered fairly well, because occasionally I have taped as well, and then gone back and realized that the things I've noted are the right ones.
And what remains for you?
What places still...
I don't know.
I don't know at the moment.
Usually after a journey is this one.
I feel very exhausted.
And then I go and write a novel.
The novels are much more about a sort of internal landscape in my case.
They're not the natural novels of a travel writer, I think.
They don't take place, many of them in distant countries.
They're more inside my head.
And it's after that sort of novel that I get sick of myself and want to go and see a billion Chinese.
And the trouble will take a long time, you know, because of the language learning.
So that's perhaps two or three years in all.
That is, that is something you impose upon yourself.
Yes, I feel that it's essential to my books to know the language.
If I didn't, I mean, half the book wouldn't be there.
And how do you do this?
I mean, you go to school.
I went to school for Russian.
I had a private tutor for Chinese.
I've been lucky.
I've been able to afford private tutors in the last couple of years, which is wonderful, just getting something.
You've just got to talk, you know.
I mean, my Russian's very ungrammatical, but it's... You're understood.
Yes, it's fairly.
You know, one did a couple of years solid of it.
You know, we're looking at 1026.
I don't think there's any more.
Now you're giving a lecture at the Smithsonian, is that right, or have you done that?
I've done that.
And what are people most interested in?
It varies.
The question always comes up is, is this part of the world going to give us fundamentalist Islam?
You know, and these questions are really answered in the book more.
It's probably the question.
I've stayed away from things in the book.
Yes, well, a lot of them are asking those sort of questions.
Some are interested in the motivation, you know, why you do this, the loneliness, the sheer practical hardships and dangers.
They always want to know if you've been in
danger and the sort of how you confront it.
I mean, I guess danger is there fear, I guess, is more.
Because sometimes maybe even the danger isn't there, but if you're fearful of it, then... Yes.
I usually find more that the danger's there, but the fear isn't.
It's all the peculiar.
I find I get used to it, really.
You begin to accept a certain amount of danger.
And then as the situation gets a little bit more dangerous, like driving into Tajikistan, which is in civil war,
You sort of don't think about it much until you get back home and you think, God, oh, I did that.
Then you feel rather pleased with yourself.
But at the time, it's not a conquest of fear.
I'd like to say it was.
If I fear, very afraid, I don't think I would care.
It is kind of coincidentally curious that the person's at the same place, but there's all this Chechnya thing popping up.
And you have a place that nobody's ever heard of, certainly over here.
Where the hell is Chechnya all of a sudden, you know?
And it is interesting, because all this is a consequence of the disintegration of the Soviets.
Suddenly people are conscious of these places, which have always been stifled before they've been silent.
Would you inscribe this for me, sir?
Of course I would.